evaṃ deva caturdaśātmakajagadrūpeṇa jāta: puna-
stasyordhvaṃ khalu satyalokanilaye jāto'si dhātā svayam |
yaṃ śaṃsanti hiraṇyagarbhamakhilatrailokyajīvātmakaṃ
yo'bhūt sphītarajovikāravikasannānāsisṛkṣārasa: ||1||
evaṃ deva	in this manner O Lord!
caturdaśa-ātmaka-jagat-rūpeṇa	in the form of the fourteen worlds
jāta: puna: -	manifesting (Thyself) again
tasya-ūrdhvaṃ khalu	at the head (peak) of that (the worlds)
satya-loka-nilaye	in the abode of Satyaloka
jāta: -asi dhātā svayaṃ	manifested as Brahma (the Creator) Thyself
yaṃ śaṃsanti	whom (Brahma) (the Srutis) describe
hiraṇyagarbham-	(as) Hiranyagarbh
akhila-trailokya-jīvātmakaṃ	of all the beings in the three worlds as the collective soul
ya: -abhūt	who became
sphīta-raja:-vikāra-vikasan-	because of the upsurge of Rajoguna
nānā-sisṛkṣā-rasa:	desirous of creating various beings
Thus O Lord! Thou who manifested in the form of the fourteen worlds, again by Thy own will, manifested as Brahma, in Satyaloka, which is the highest and loftiest of all the worlds.This Brahma is known as Hiranya Garbh (the golden egg) the cosmic intelligence of all the beings of the three worlds. With the upsurge of Rajoguna, Thou as this Hiranya Garbha became desirous of creating various beings.
so'yaṃ viśvavisargadattahṛdaya: sampaśyamāna: svayaṃ
bodhaṃ khalvanavāpya viśvaviṣayaṃ cintākulastasthivān |
tāvattvaṃ jagatāṃ pate tapa tapetyevaṃ hi vaihāyasīṃ
vāṇīmenamaśiśrava: śrutisukhāṃ kurvaṃstapa:preraṇām ||2||
sa: -ayaṃ	that this (Brahma)
viśva-visarga-datta-hṛdaya:	to create the universe resolving in the heart
sampaśyamāna: svayaṃ	trying to contemplate by himself
bodhaṃ khalu-anavāpya	the knowledge (required to create) indeed not getting
viśvaviṣayaṃ	about the subject universe
cintā-ākula: -tasthivān	worried remained
tāvat-tvaṃ jagatāṃ pate	then Thou O Lord of the universe!
tapa tapa-iti-evaṃ hi	Do penance, do penance' thus indeed
vaihāyasīṃ vāṇīṃ-	by a voice from the sky
enam-aśiśrava:	to him (Brahma) made (him) hear
śruti-sukhāṃ	(which was) pleasing to the ears
kurvan-tapa: preraṇām	(and) prompted him to do penance
O Lord of the universe! Brahma intent on creating, wanted to have the knowledge of creating. In spite of his best efforts he could not do so on his own and hence he got worried. Then O Lord! willed by Thee, Brahma heard two pleasant words 'Tapa,Tapa' coming from nowhere, which prompted him to do penance.
ko'sau māmavadat pumāniti jalāpūrṇe jaganmaṇḍale
dikṣūdvīkṣya kimapyanīkṣitavatā vākyārthamutpaśyatā |
divyaṃ varṣasahasramāttatapasā tena tvamārādhita -
stasmai darśitavānasi svanilayaṃ vaikuṇṭhamekādbhutam ||3||
ka: -asau	who is it
mām-avadat pumān-	(who) spoke to me, the revered person
iti	thus (thinking)
jala-āpūrṇe jaganmaṇḍale	in the worlds fully engulfed in water
dikṣu-udvīkṣya	in all the directions looking around
kim-api-anīkṣitavatā	anything not seeing
vākya-artham-utpaśyatā	the meaning of the words then understanding
divyaṃ varṣa-sahasram-	for a thousand divine years
ātta-tapasā	doing penance
tena tvam-ārādhita: -	by him (Brahma) Thou were worshipped
tasmai darśitavān-asi	to him (Brahma) Thou revealed
sva-nilayaṃ	Thy own abode
vaikuṇṭham-eka-adbhutaṃ	the Vaikunthloka wonderful
Brahma looked around in all the directions to look for the revered person who spoke those words. The world was engulfed in water and there was no one to be seen. Then the meaning of the words dawned on him and for a thousand divine years he did penance and worshipped Thee. Thou , then revealed Thy wonderful abode Vaikunth to Brahma.
māyā yatra kadāpi no vikurute bhāte jagadbhyo bahi:
śokakrodhavimohasādhvasamukhā bhāvāstu dūraṃ gatā: |
sāndrānandajharī ca yatra paramajyoti:prakāśātmake
tatte dhāma vibhāvitaṃ vijayate vaikuṇṭharūpaṃ vibho ||4||
māyā yatra	Maayaa where
kadāpi no vikurute	never produces modifications
bhāte jagadbhya: bahi:	(which) shines beyond all the fourteen worlds
śoka-krodha-vimoha-sādhvasamukhā:	sorrow, anger, delusion, fear etc.
bhāvā:-tu dūraṃ gatā:	(such) mental modifications are far beyond
sāndrānandajharī ca	and the torrent of supreme bliss
yatra parama-jyoti:-prakāśātmake	where there is the splendour of the supreme light of consciousness
tat-te dhāma	that abode of Thine
vibhāvitaṃ	(was) shown (to Brahmaa)
vijayate	shining
vaikuṇṭharūpaṃ	as the Vaikunthloka
vibho	O All pervading Lord!
O All pervading Lord! Where Maayaa has no influence and which is located beyond the fourteen worlds, where the modifications of the mind, like sorrow,anger delusion fear are left far behind,such is Thy abode Vaikunth. It is full of supreme bliss and is engulfed with the constant flow of bright effulgence. That shining divine abode Thou showed to Brahmaa.
yasminnāma caturbhujā harimaṇiśyāmāvadātatviṣo
nānābhūṣaṇaratnadīpitadiśo rājadvimānālayā: |
bhaktiprāptatathāvidhonnatapadā dīvyanti divyā janā-
tatte dhāma nirastasarvaśamalaṃ vaikuṇṭharūpaṃ jayet ||5||
yasmin-nāma	in which verily
caturbhujā:	the four armed (divine beings)
hari-maṇi-śyāmā-avadātatviṣa:	the brilliant deep blue color of the sapphire like (whose) complexion (is)
nānā-bhūṣaṇa-ratna-dīpita-diśa:	adorned with various ornaments studded with lustrous gems (which) light up the quarters
rājat-vimāna-ālayā:	residing in aerial cars
bhakti-prāpta-tathā-vidha-unnata-padā:	(who have) by devotion (to Thee) attained such high state
dīvyanti	shine
divyā: janā:	the divine beings
tat-te dhāma	(in) that abode of Thine
nirasta-sarva-śamalaṃ	which is free from all taint (sin)
vaikuṇṭha-rūpaṃ	(which is) known as Vaikunth
jayet	may it be victorious
In Thy abode which is known as Vaikunth, live the divine beings who have four arms and their complexion is like deep blue lustre of sapphire. They are adorned with various jewels which are studded with gems which enlighten the quarters. They reside in aerial cars. They have achieved this high state by the merit of intense devotion to Thee. Hail to that abode of Thine which is pure and sinless.
nānādivyavadhūjanairabhivṛtā vidyullatātulyayā
viśvonmādanahṛdyagātralatayā vidyotitāśāntarā |
tvatpādāṃbujasaurabhaikakutukāllakṣmī: svayaṃ lakṣyate
yasmin vismayanīyadivyavibhavaṃ tatte padaṃ dehi me ||6||
nānā-divya-vadhū-janai: -	by various divine damsels
abhivṛtā	(who is) attended
vidyut-latā-tulyayā	(who is) like a streak of lightning
viśva-unmādana-hṛdya-gātra-latayā	the world is enchanted and captivated by (whose) slender and charming form
vidyotita-āśāntarā	(who) illumines the quarters
tvat-pāda-ambuja-saurabhaika-kutukāt-	to Thy lotus feet fragrance being attached to
lakṣmī: svayaṃ lakṣyate	where Laxmi herself is seen
yasmin	in which (Vaikunth)
vismayanīya-divya-vibhavaṃ	in astounding divine riches (which) abound
tat-te padaṃ dehi me	that Thy abode grant me
O Lord! That abode of Thine Vaikunth, where Laxmi Thy consort resides, is attended to by various celestial damsels. Her, Laxmi's, slender and beautiful form is like the streak of lightening which enchants and captivates the whole world and enlightens the quarters. She being deeply attached to the fragrance of Thy lotus feet is herself always there, in Vaikunth, which abounds in astounding divine riches. O Lord that abode of Thine grant to me.
tatraivaṃ pratidarśite nijapade ratnāsanādhyāsitaṃ
bhāsvatkoṭilasatkirīṭakaṭakādyākalpadīprākṛti |
śrīvatsāṅkitamāttakaustubhamaṇicchāyāruṇaṃ kāraṇaṃ
viśveṣāṃ tava rūpamaikṣata vidhistatte vibho bhātu me ||7||
tatra evaṃ	there thus
pratidarśite nijapade	having shown Thy abode (to Brahmaa)
ratna-āsana-ādhyāsitaṃ	on a throne studded with gems, seated
bhāsvat-koṭi-lasat-kirīṭa-	shining like innumerable suns, adorned with such a crown
kaṭaka-ādi-ākalpa-dīpra-ākṛti	(and) bracelets etc. other ornaments of splendorous shapes
śrīvatsa-aṅkitam-	bearing the Shreevatsa mark (on Thy chest)
ātta-kaustubha-maṇi-chāyā-aruṇaṃ	(which) is rendered, by the kaustubh gem's lustre, crimson
kāraṇaṃ viśveṣāṃ	the source of all creation
tava rūpam-	Thy form
aikṣata vidhi:	saw Brahmaa
tat-te vibho bhātu me	that Thy ( form) O Lord ! May be revealed to me
There thus revealed to Brahma, he saw Thee seated on a gem bedecked throne, adorned with golden crown, bracelets and other ornaments which were shining like innumerable suns.Thy chest bore the Shrivatsa mark, and the kaustubh jewel's lustre gave Thy form a crimson hue. O All pervading Lord! the source of all creation, may that divine form be revealed to me.
kālāṃbhodakalāyakomalarucīcakreṇa cakraṃ diśā -
māvṛṇvānamudāramandahasitasyandaprasannānanam |
rājatkambugadāripaṅkajadharaśrīmadbhujāmaṇḍalaṃ
sraṣṭustuṣṭikaraṃ vapustava vibho madrogamudvāsayet ||8||
kāla-ambhoda-	like dark clouds
kalāya-komala-rucī-cakreṇa	(and) delicate blue lily flowers, the splendorous halo
cakraṃ diśām-āvṛṇvānam-	(Thy form) illuminating all the quarters
udāra-manda-hasita	by a charming benevolent smile
syand-prasanna-ānanam	(Thy) face brightened
rājat-kambu-gadā-ari-paṅkaja-dhara-	adorned with the conch, mace, discus, and lotus
śrīmad-bhujāmaṇḍalaṃ	held in Thy divine four arms
sraṣṭu: - tuṣṭikaraṃ	to Brahmaa (which) gave great contentment
vapu: - tava vibho	Thy form, Oh All pervading Lord
mat-rogam-udvāsayet	my ailments (may it) eradicate
O Lord! Beautiful like the dark clouds, with a hue like that of delicate blue lotus flowers, and with a splendid halo, Thy form enlightens all the quarters. A charming benevolent smile is sported on Thy pleasant face. Thy four arms are adorned with the sacred conch, discus, mace and lotus. That form of Thine gave immense pleasure to Brahmaa. May that form deign to eradicate my ailments.
dṛṣṭvā sambhṛtasambhrama: kamalabhūstvatpādapāthoruhe
harṣāveśavaśaṃvado nipatita: prītyā kṛtārthībhavan |
jānāsyeva manīṣitaṃ mama vibho jñānaṃ tadāpādaya
dvaitādvaitabhavatsvarūpaparamityācaṣṭa taṃ tvāṃ bhaje ||9||
dṛṣṭvā	having had (Thy) vision
sambhṛta-sambhrama: kamalabhū: -	overwhelmed with astonishment, the lotus born ( Brahmaa)
tvat-pāda-pāthoruhe	at Thy lotus feet
harṣa-āveśa-vaśaṃvada:	overflowing with ecstasy of joy
nipatita:	fell and prostrated
prītyā kṛtārthī-bhavan	with love and sense of fulfilment
jānāsi-eva	Thou does surely know
manīṣitaṃ mama	my desire
vibho	O Lord!
jñānaṃ tat-āpādaya	that knowledge give to me
dvaita-advait-bhavat-svarūpa-param-	(about) Thy unique dual and non-dual aspects
iti ācaṣṭa	thus prayed (Brahmaa)
tam tvāṃ bhaje	That Being Thou I pray to
O Lord of the Universe! Brahmaa was wonderstruck by Thy vision. He was overwhelmed with the ecstasy of joy and with love and a sense of fulfilment . He fell at Thy lotus feet and prostrated. He prayed to Thee that Thou surely knew his desire to create, and so he asked for the required knowledge. He also prayed to be given the knowledge of the unique dual and the non-dual aspect of Thee. I pray to That Thee.
ātāmre caraṇe vinamramatha taṃ hastena haste spṛśan
bodhaste bhavitā na sargavidhibhirbandho'pi sañjāyate |
ityābhāṣya giraṃ pratoṣya nitarāṃ taccittagūḍha: svayaṃ
sṛṣṭau taṃ samudairaya: sa bhagavannullāsayollāghatām ||10||
ātāmre caraṇe	at (Thy) crimson feet
vinamram-atha taṃ	(who was) humble, then, to him (Brahmaa)
hastena haste spṛśan	with Thy hands his hand touching
bodha: -te bhavitā	(said) you will have that knowledge
na sarga-vidhibhi:-	and not by the act of creation
bandha: -api-sañjāyate	bondage also will result
iti-ābhāṣya giraṃ	uttering these words
pratoṣya nitarāṃ	making him extremely happy
tat-citta-gūḍha: svayaṃ	in his heart remaining concealed Thyself
sṛṣṭau taṃ samudairaya:	prompted him to create
sa bhagavan-	(Thou) such O Lord!
ullāsaya	hasten
ullāghatām	(my) recovery
Brahmaa was with full humbleness prostrating at Thy crimson feet. Thou touched his hand with Thy hands and said to him that he would get the knowledge required for creation, and also that he will not be tainted by the act of creation.Giving him this assurance and pleasing him extremely, Thou ,remaining in his heart, prompted him in the act of creation. O Lord! of such benevolence, kindly hasten my recovery.